In November 2012 Australian ex-Prime Minister
Julia Gillard proposed a Royal Commission
to investigate institutional responses to
child sexual abuse.
It covered a range of institutions including
schools, churches and sports clubs
in a total of 57 public hearings
recording the testimonies of nearly 7,000
abused individuals
around 64% of whom were male
and 10% of whom said it was the first time
they’d told anyone about their abuse.
There would be testimonies
from people like Hugh
who was abused around age 10 by a scout leader
who, after gaining his parents’ trust, had
him over for parties
where boys were plied with marijuana and alcohol
and molested.
And like Margaret, who was 11 when she was
abused at a Salvation Army children’s home
by a church captain who not only molested
children
but orchestrated their abuse of each other.
To conduct the Commission’s investigation,
a panel of six commissioners was appointed
headed by Justice Peter McClellan
a former Chief Judge for the Supreme Court
of New South Wales
and Assistant Commissioner for the Independent
Commission Against Corruption.
In May 2015, the Commission began to investigate
‘case 29’ of their public hearings
which concerned responses to child sexual
abuse within the Jehovah’s Witness organisation.
Assisting counsel for the Commission was the
formidable Angus Stewart QC.
In a video called ‘concealing abuse’
I looked at how the Jehovah’s Witness organisation
responded
to real-life allegations of child sexual abuse
against its members
and how its policies tend to protect the abuser.
For instance, even if they fully believe the
allegations made against a member
the congregation’s judicial and spiritual
leaders —known as ‘elders’ —
won’t take any action unless either there
are at least two witnesses to the abuse
which is unlikely in view of the private nature
of sexual abuse
or the abuser confesses voluntarily — which
is again, unlikely.
Even when these exacting demands are met,
justice is far from guaranteed.
While the organisation possesses
the judicial apparatus
to eject molesters from congregations
it repeatedly fails to use it.
In a form of excommunication known as disfellowshipping
individuals judged to be unrepentant sinners
are completely shunned by all members
including family. But individuals found guilty
of molestation
can avoid this fate just by apologising.
If they express repentance to their congregation’s
elders, they can simply be ‘reproved’.
All this entails is an announcement being
made to their congregation
that they’ve been reprimanded for an unspecified
transgression.
And that’s it.
They’ll be left in the congregation, risking
further molestation
and the constant retraumatisation of the individuals
they’ve abused
who often feel forced out of their own congregation.
These kinds of misguided policies serve to
protect abusers and punish the abused.
Through its in-depth investigation of individual
cases
the Australian Royal Commission would expose
a daunting maze of unthinkable additional hurdles
faced by sexually abused children raised in
the Jehovah’s Witness organisation.
The Commission focused on the experiences
of two individuals abused by members of the
organisation.
For anonymity, the individuals were codenamed
BCB and BCG.
BCB was the first to take the witness stand.
She testified to the following account:
She was born in 1967.
When she was 10, her mother
became a Jehovah’s Witness
and started taking her and her brother to
meetings.
BCB drifted apart from her father who didn’t
attend.
At age 12, she met Bronwyn and Bill Neill
and became friends with a daughter of theirs.
She would attend meetings at their house and
sleep over.
Mr. Neill discouraged both girls from making
non-Witness friends at school
based on the idea that ‘bad association
spoils useful habits’
a sentiment derived from the Biblical passage
1 Corinthians 15:33.
The sexual jokes Mr. Neill started making
in front of her
would signal the onset of an escalating pattern
of abuse.
At age 14, when she stayed over with the Neill
family
he started inserting his tongue in her mouth
when he kissed her goodnight.
She would endure these inappropriate kisses
for the next four years.
She felt ashamed and scared, and worried about
upsetting Mrs. Neill.
But Mr. Neill was an elder, and she submitted
to his authority.
When she was 17, he intruded on her while
she was showering
somehow managing to unlock a locked door.
He left when she screamed ‘Get out’
but later gave her a vicious belting for making
too much noise in her bedroom.
At age 18, she was subjected to more overtly
sexual behaviour.
He called her a nymphomaniac and a prostitute.
One time, Mrs. Neill caught him tongue-kissing
BCB and stopped him.
But nothing further was said or done — and
his forcefulness escalated
culminating in an incident in which he trapped
BCB in the bathroom
and violated her manually and orally.
The next day, he entered her room and suggested
she’d enjoy full intercourse.
She asked him to leave, then packed and returned
to her parents’ farm.
The next year, when he heard through his daughter
that BCB had been seeing a couple of boys
Neill invoked his role as an elder to summon
her to talk about boys.
She felt she had no choice.
He took the opportunity to inspect her physically
and abuse her verbally.
Two years later in 1989, having married
she confided in her husband and also a friend
about Neill’s abuse.
The friend then disclosed this information
to someone else.
A week or so later, a young elder called Max
Horley approached her to arrange a visit.
During the visit, he revealed he’d come
to talk about Neill.
BCB gave some details but was too ashamed
to recount the bathroom incident.
Horley invited Neill to BCB’s house, to
speak with her and her husband.
Despite her discomfort at opening up her own
home to her abuser
she did as she was told on the assumption
that Horley knew the correct procedure.
She didn’t recall having the purpose of
the meeting explained to her.
And she felt too inhibited to recount the
full details in front of Neill
or challenge him when he suggested his behaviour
was meant as a joke.
Afterwards, BCB approached Horley and gave
more details.
This led to a second meeting, with the addition
attendance of one Doug Jackson
a circuit overseer — someone who supervises
multiple congregations.
His presence and the purpose of the meeting
weren’t explained
it was just presented as a ‘committee meeting’.
Neill attempted to blame BCB for wearing revealing
clothes
but Jackson said the church didn’t accept
that excuse.
Again Neill’s presence inhibited her, as
did being in a room full of men.
She said if a female she trusted from the
congregation had been there too
it might’ve been easier.
At the end of the meeting, Neill was told
to apologise, which he did.
BCB was given no explanation of the meeting’s
outcome or of what would happen.
Jackson gave her an article about child sexual
abuse
published in one of the organisation’s magazines,
called the Watchtower.
Not long after this, Mrs. Neill phoned BCB
and told her ‘Bill didn’t abuse you.’
BCB reported this to Horley, who said he’d
sort it out.
Later that day, he phoned and said:
‘The Neills have asked that you not tell
any more people about Bill
out of respect for the family.’
Scared, disorientated and unsupported, she
did as she was told.
It was only years later that she saw the perversity
of being asked to respect the man who abused
her
when nobody had offered her the respect or
support she deserved.
Weeks later, it was announced that Neill had
stepped down as an elder, with no reason given.
Nobody talked to BCB about her abuse
and she was still expected to attend study
meetings at the Neills’ house.
She asked not to go there — but was told
she had to.
Mrs. Neill ignored her.
Finally in 1994 she moved from the area to
another congregation.
In 2012, she gave a written statement to two
elders
including one Joe Bello, summarising her experience
in an effort to support the case of anyone
else Neill might’ve abused.
Eighteen months later, Bello visited on an
unrelated matter
and BCB told him she was considering reporting
her abuse to the Royal Commission.
She said Bello later spoke to her husband
and said:
‘You should ask [BCB] if she really wants
to drag Jehovah’s name through the mud.’
BCB was dismayed to find that the burden of
Neill’s shameful actions
had been put on her shoulders.
Although she eventually reported her experiences
to the Royal Commission
she suffered extreme misplaced guilt about
betraying the organisation
guilt that manifested in physical symptoms
such as chest tightness, heart palpitations
and difficulty breathing.
She reported that her abuse destroyed her
confidence and self-esteem
and instilled in her a sense of victimhood and a constant paranoia that people were judging her.
She went on to experience suicidal thoughts
and a nervous breakdown.
She said Neill’s position as an elder gave
him power over her
and suggested that if she’d been allowed
to speak to other children outside the congregation
they might’ve reported her abuse to the
appropriate authorities.
She suggested a number of changes
in the way the organisation dealt with child
sexual abuse.
She said it should take allegations more seriously
and report them to the police
give proper support and protection for children
and not require female targets of male abuse
to speak in front of a room full of men, including
their alleged abuser.
She also noted that no compensation was offered.
The Commission sought to address all of these
issues.
Max Horley was the next to testify, and sworn
in on a Biblical oath.
Not long into Horley’s testimony
assisting counsel Stewart noted that he seemed
hesitant in his recollections
and asked if this was because of the passage
of time — which Horley affirmed.
Judge McClellan asked Horley if he’d taken
notes.
He said he might’ve at the time — but
they would’ve been destroyed.
When asked why, he said the elders didn’t
want their wives
knowing what sort of things
they were dealing with
and that it was also to protect the person
involved and the rest of the congregation
so they didn’t have to know
about these things.
It was not only a deeply patronising rationale
but a dangerous one
leaving congregations unsuspecting about the
molesters in their midst
which is exactly what molesters want.
Horley confirmed that destroying notes remained
the current practice.
When asked if he was aware of his obligations
to tell authorities about serious allegations
of sexual assault
Horley showed no awareness
and said he’d contact his branch for advice
on how to proceed.
Unthinking deference to the branch would become
a familiar stock response
from the elders called to testify to the Commission.
Horley expressed confusion about what constituted
criminal assault
and later admitted giving no consideration
to reporting it to the police.
This was an individual invested with the safety
and protection
of an unquestioningly trusting congregation.
A shepherd charged with guarding the flock.
But in the shepherd metaphor, Horley was more
like the sheepdog
cluelessly obeying the whistles of an unseen
shepherd
who could just as easily direct him to harm
the sheep as to protect them.
The Biblical passage Matthew 18:15 has been
cited by the organisation as a basis
for requiring abused individuals to confront
their abusers with their allegations.
McClellan asked Horley if he realised how
inappropriate this process of confrontation was.
Horley said he could understand it now, but
hadn’t reflected on it at the time
because he was just following procedure.
He agreed it could be very difficult for people
who’d suffered abuse
to share everything done to them in front
of their abuser.
He said the organisation wanted to keep Neill’s
abuse as quiet as possible
not to try to cover it up, but just to stop
the conversation.
But almost immediately, he contradicted himself
saying they would’ve tried to keep the matter
under wraps
in another words cover it up.
Stewart made the case to Horley
that by directing BCB
not to speak to anyone in the congregation
he left her with no one to talk to.
Horley suggested that because BCB was still
working in the community
she could’ve spoken to people outside the
organisation.
But Stewart pointed out that members are advised
not to have
close friendships or associations with non-members.
Horley affirmed that was true
but said that whether members took that advice
or not was entirely up to them.
Many of us who’ve experienced abusive environments
with be familiar with this responsibility-dodging
manoeuvre
in which individuals are given clear instructions
on what to do or what not to do
then when they suffer as a direct consequence
of following those instructions
they’re told they didn’t have to follow
them after all.
And they’re blamed for their own suffering.
The fact is Jehovah’s Witnesses are warned
in the strongest terms
against what are called ‘bad associations’
with non-members
which they’re told will result in disaster.
For Horley to suggest that BCB was somehow
supposed to view this
merely as a piece of advice she was free to
take or leave
was disingenuous in the extreme.
Stewart put it to Horley that he was saying
two different things.
On one hand, saying BCB couldn’t
speak to people
then on the other, that she could.
Horley claimed he didn’t mean to cut BCB
off from any support
but admitted he couldn’t recall arranging
anyone to assist her through the period.
Stewart produced a letter from Horley
and the circuit overseer Doug Jackson
to their branch office.
The letter said: It appears that a number
of brothers know about the matter
and unfortunately there may be worldly people
who also know.
‘Worldly’ is the derogatory term Jehovah’s
Witnesses use for non-members.
Stewart asked why it mattered
if worldly people knew?
Horley said the organisation didn’t want
anything to detract from their ‘clean’ reputation.
In fact the organisation is heavily invested
in its reputation among outsiders.
It seems perverse that it should be so concerned
about what worldly people think
considering it despises us as debauched and
degenerate
characterises us as the instigators of broken homes
illegitimate births and sexually transmitted diseases
and countless other emotional and physical woes
and compares us to what it calls ‘death-dealing’
polluted air.
But of course projecting a ‘clean’ image
is what the organisation relies on to attract
new members.
And it has no moral qualms whatsoever about
using deception
to try and maintain that patently false image.
It even has a formal policy
called ‘theocratic warfare’
that gives members explicit permission to
deceive worldly people
on the grounds that they’re not entitled
to the truth.
I explored the perversity of this policy in
my ‘concealing abuse’ video.
What that video doesn’t mention is a particular
exception to the policy
one of special relevance to the Royal Commission.
Witnesses are told that when they take any
oath to tell the truth
or are placed on a witness stand, they’re
obligated to speak the truth
if they speak at all.
In these circumstances,
the only option they have
other than to speak the truth,
is to remain silent.
It’ll become clear that even this rule was
flouted
by Jehovah’s Witnesses during the Commission
hearing.
It’ll also become increasingly clear just
how far down in their list of priorities
came the welfare of the children they were
supposed to protect.
Horley and Jackson’s letter about Bill Neill
to the branch office stated:
‘We recommended to him that he step down
as an elder’ and that ‘He agreed to this.’
Stewart put it to Horley that it seemed they
had offered Neill
a chance to step down voluntarily, rather
than be forcibly removed.
Horley denied this, claiming it was just an
unfortunate choice of words.
But those unfortunate words were consistent
with BCB’s previous testimony
that Neill had merely stepped down.
In the same letter, Horley and Jackson added
that they felt no further action or restrictions
need apply.
This meant Neill was free to participate
in all the same church and Bible study meetings
as before
including meetings at his home which BCB was
expected to attend.
The letter went on to make the bizarrely premature
recommendation
that once the matter had died down, Neill
should be recommended
as an elder again so he could help the congregation
as he’d done in the past.
Stewart asked Horley if
by the phrase ‘dying down’
he meant once the controversy has abated.
Horley claimed that the term ‘dying down’
was another case of unfortunate wording.
When Stewart then suggested that Horley’s
prime concern
was about Neill’s reputation, he initially
rejected the idea.
But Stewart continued along this line
suggesting that Horley’s concern was about
the functioning of his organisation
and not about the protection of children in
his congregation.
Horley agreed.
When Stewart put it to him his concern wasn’t
about what support he could offer BCB.
Horley admitted that while that had ‘some
bearing’ for him
it was more about Neill’s qualifications
to teach.
It was a stunning confession.
Towards the end of his period in the witness stand
Horley was given a detailed account of BCB’s abuse.
He hadn’t known about any of it and said
it came as a shock to him.
He was asked if he thought the fact it was
only coming to light now
had something to do with the process he engaged
in when BCB made the initial complaint
a process in which she had to make her allegations
to her abuser
and an elder who she knew was friends with
her abuser.
He said he could see the point being made.
When it was suggested BCB needed a more nurturing
supportive environment
to make a full disclosure, he agreed.
But when asked if he had any thoughts on what
the organisation should do about it
he reverted to compliant form, saying he had
no comments
he just followed the procedures.
What came across from the many elders called
to testify at the Commission
was that they were so immersed in procedure
they failed to consider the accuser’s experience.
Doug Jackson’s responses clearly illustrated
this lack of empathy.
When it was put to Jackson that BCB was unaware
of the purpose of the meetings she was attending
initially he flat-out rejected the idea.
But Stewart took some time to remind him
that as an elder he had knowledge not given
to the congregation
knowledge of judicial procedures, standards
of evidence and punitive measures.
Stewart then asked Jackson if he’d accept
BCB wouldn’t know about these things.
Jackson changed his ‘no’ to a ‘maybe’.
Stewart asked if Jackson could see how this
lack of transparency
would’ve left BCB in a position of vulnerability
and confusion.
Jackson said he did now.
Stewart repeated to Jackson the portion of
BCB’s statement
in which she was asked in one of the judicial meetings
whether she had anything more to tell
and she falsely responded ‘No’ because
of various inhibiting factors.
These included talking in front of a room
full of men
talking in front of her abuser and being afraid
of the consequences of telling the truth.
Jackson accepted that talking about her abuse
to a room full of men
would’ve been very hard for BCB
as would talking in front of her abuser.
But when it was put to him that BCB didn’t
feel it was a safe environment
he said he didn’t know why she would’ve
felt that
because they tried to comfort her.
He seemed unable to comprehend that his supposed
efforts to comfort BCB
weren’t enough to magically overcome all
the intimidating factors she identified.
Instead of admitting that he had failed to
comfort her
his instinct was instead to insinuate that
the failure was hers
she had failed to receive the comfort he offered.
This kind of mindset is common in high-control
groups that deny individuality.
Members are slotted into fixed procedures
and expected to give fixed reactions.
When they don’t, the fault is with them
— not the procedure.
McClellan put it to Jackson that the organisation’s
investigative process
inflicted further trauma on BCB.
Jackson said he understood that now — but
hadn’t appreciated it at the time.
It’s instructive to reflect on the reflex
dismissiveness of the elders
who testified at the Commission whenever it
was suggested
that the abused individuals in their care
felt unsafe or unsupported.
Judge McClellan and assisting counsel Stewart
were two highly skilled communicators.
They also wielded the power of the legal system.
But even they had to repeatedly spend exhausting
swathes of time
walking the elders through their own procedures
trying to get them to empathise with the experiences
of those abused individuals.
If, with their considerable skill and power
they had to work this hard to break through
the elders’ dismissiveness
what chance did an unskilled powerless member
of a Jehovah’s Witness congregation have
of making themselves heard?
Another elder concerned with reputation was
Joe Bello
one of the elders BCB wrote to years after
the abuse
in an effort to protect other children from
Bill Neill.
Asked about whether he would ever report a
matter to the police
Bello fell back on the mantra-like evasion
given by the other elders:
he’d contact the branch.
Bello confirmed BCB’s account that when
her husband had mentioned
they were thinking of talking to the Royal
Commission
Bello had asked what that could accomplish
other than dragging Jehovah’s name through
the mud.
It was put to him that this would be understood
as a discouragement against going to the Commission.
He said that wasn’t how it was meant — he
was just thinking aloud.
Although Bello initially seemed to regret
his words
and reflected that he shouldn’t have said them
he then revealed that he stood by the underlying
sentiment.
Stewart asked him if, within his faith, Jehovah
was considered a loving god.
When Bello confirmed this, Stewart asked if
Jehovah would not also then
be more concerned about the victim than his
own name.
Defiantly, Bello replied: ‘Jehovah would
be concerned about the victim
but Jehovah is concerned about his own name too.’
Judge McClellan asked Bello if he’d been
following the work of the Royal Commission.
Bello hadn’t — despite knowing a couple
of months previously
that he would have to give evidence.
He said he might’ve scanned the headlines
of the Saturday paper
but he didn’t watch the news or listen to
the radio.
His complete lack of interest in the Commission’s
work was abundantly clear
and consistent with the apathy exhibited
by most of the witnesses testifying for the
organisation.
Doctor Monica Applewhite was paid by the organisation
to be an expert witness in its defence.
Applewhite presented herself as an independent
consultant in child sexual abuse
visiting institutes to make risk assessments
and develop educational programs and policies.
This included assessing how they prevented abuse;
how they responded to warning signs;
how they responded to disclosures of abuse;
and how they remedied the situation.
Applewhite was an unexpected choice of champion
for the Jehovah’s Witnesses
because she was an active member
of the Catholic church
which the organisation has repeatedly dismissed
as a false religion
characterised as an enemy of true worship
criticised for its political meddling and
slated for its handling of child sexual abuse.
Leaving aside the strangeness of this alliance
Applewhite’s testimony was a mess.
Stewart and McClellan noted that many opinions
offered in her report had no source references.
Applewhite said she was already fully scheduled
when she started working on the report
so she hadn’t been conscientious about her
citations.
In fact what emerged from Applewhite’s report
and testimony
was that her so-called expert evidence
consisted of browsing online material from
the organisation’s own website
and speaking to staff from its legal branch.
She said she hadn’t reviewed any specific cases
and couldn’t offer any opinion
on whether the implementation
of the organisation’s policies
had resulted in law-abiding responses
good practice of child protection
or compassionate care.
As Stewart noted, all she’d basically done
was a documentary review.
Applewhite showed a distinct lack of awareness
of the power relationship between elders and
congregation members
erroneously stating that elders were merely viewed
as ‘fellow workers’ by the congregation.
As Stewart pointed out, elders were very clearly
characterised
by the organisation as shepherds over the flock.
Their privilege and authority was reinforced
by the belief
that elders were directly appointed by the
Holy Spirit
another fact of which she was unaware.
Applewhite stated there was no requirement
for elders or ministerial servants to be alone
with children.
But Stewart produced a branch document directed
to all elders
stating that elders and ministerial servants
are put in a position of trust
that explicitly included being more liberal
about leaving children in their care.
Applewhite was also unaware of the fact that
abused individuals
were cautioned not to reveal facts about the
congregation in group therapy.
The only stipulation she’d heard in regards
to therapy
was that the organisation recommended choosing
someone
who respected their religious beliefs.
As the facts about the actual experience of
abused individuals emerged
Applewhite began to withdraw
some of her poorly considered support for
the organisation.
She announced that if it turned out that people
had to confront their abusers and had to sit
in the room with no support
that would not meet the standards of care.
She conceded she hadn’t understood that
that was the process.
Applewhite stated that when somebody abuses
and their internal mechanisms of control had
allowed them to cross that line once
she didn’t have confidence in those internal
mechanisms of control for the future.
As such, she suggested that the risk
of re-offence was great
and agreed that positive steps needed to be taken
to ensure that such a person didn’t have access
or the opportunity to abuse again.
She said there should be strong and cooperative
relationships
with child protection authorities
but had no awareness of the difficult relationship
the Jehovah’s Witness organisation had with
secular authorities.
The Commission didn’t consider that Applewhite’s
report had assisted their enquiry
and rejected her opinions on numerous grounds
including lack of evidence or citations
but most damningly, because she’d failed
to investigate
the experiences of a single survivor of child
sexual abuse
whose complaint was dealt with by the Jehovah’s
Witness organisation.
By the end of this first case
the Royal Commission had already gathered
confirmation of unthinkable negligence
deeply inappropriate and traumatising procedures
and a cover-up mentality that elevated reputation
far above the protection of children
and led to the use of shaming tactics on abused
individuals to try and silence them.
From this atrocious start, things would only
get worse.
As I’ll be showing in part two
shocking new levels of deception and corruption
within the organisation would be laid bare
including evidence that some elders had stooped
to breaking their own rules
in order to avoid exposing abuse.